Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are talking about the science of heat,
and more specifically, the science of heating, the verb,
meaning how our body heats up
from both the outside and the inside.
Heat is a remarkable stimulus,
meaning when we are in a hot environment,
it has a profound effect on our biology.
And heating up from the outside,
or as you'll soon learn from the inside,
has a profound effect on many different aspects
of our health, including our metabolism,
both in the immediate and long-term, our cognition,
meaning our ability to think more or less clearly.
And if you're immediately thinking
that heating up makes you less capable of thinking,
you're wrong.
Heat applied properly as a stimulus
can engage certain neurochemical systems
in your brain and body
that can allow your brain to function far better.
We will talk about those data today.
So we're going to talk about the science of heat and heating,
both in terms of their mechanisms,
and as I know many of you are interested in,
the tools related to the use of heat,
things like sauna, how often to do sauna,
how long to be in the sauna,
how hot to be in the sauna for particular goals and outcomes.
We're also going to talk about the very exciting new science
around local heating,
that is the use of heat applied to specific areas
of the body in order to heal or improve tissues
at that location that you are heating,
as well as your biology and health overall.
In fact, we are going to talk about
one very recently published paper
that came out in the journal Cell.
Cell is one of the three apex journals,
meaning three of the most competitive,
most rigorous scientific journals.
Those are Nature, Science, and Cell.
This particular paper was published in Cell,
and I will go into it in more detail later.
But basically what this paper shows
is that by locally heating up skin and fat,
you can change the identity of certain fat cells
at that location and elsewhere.
We have three kinds of fat, white fat,
beige fat, and brown fat.
And as you will learn more about soon,
white fat is not very metabolically active.
It's more of a fuel reserve.
It's what we typically think of as blubbery fat.
Beige fat and brown fat are rich in mitochondria,
and those mitochondria provide a sort of furnace
or heating mechanism for your entire body
and increase your metabolism and the burning of white fat.
So in other words,
having more beige fat and brown fat is a good thing.
And it turns out that the proper application of heat
to specific areas of your body
can increase the conversion of white fat to beige fat.
In other words, turn an innocuous fuel source
into a metabolically active tissue
that can help you burn off more white fat.
I think many people are going to be interested in this paper
and the tools that emerge from this paper.
It's a fascinating set of findings
that actually emerged from my understanding
of the biology of burn and people who receive intense burns.
And that is not what I'm going to recommend to you
as a tool, of course,
but understanding a little bit about how burns impact
our biology and health
has allowed these pioneering researchers
to develop new tools to combat obesity
and metabolic disorders,
and that you can apply for basic things like fat loss.
I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast
is now partnered with Momentous Supplements.
Our motivation for partnering with Momentous
is to provide people one location where they can go
to access the highest quality supplements
in the specific dosages that are best supported
by the scientific research
and that are discussed during various episodes
of the Huberman Lab Podcast.
If you go to livemomentous.com slash Huberman,
you will see those formulations.
I should mention that we are going to add more formulations
in the months to come,
and you will see specific suggestions
about how best to take those supplements,
meaning what dosages and times of day,
and in fact, how to combine those supplements
with specific behavioral protocols
that have been discussed on the podcast
and are science supported
in order to derive the maximum benefit
from those supplements.
And many of you will probably also be pleased to learn
that Momentous ships not just within the United States,
but also internationally.
So once again, if you go to livemomentous.com slash Huberman,
you will find what we firmly believe
to be the best quality supplements in the precise dosages
and the best protocols for taking those supplements
along with the ideal behavioral protocols
to combine with those supplement formulations.
I'm pleased to announce
that I am hosting two live events in May, 2022.
The first live event will take place in Seattle, Washington
on May 17th.
The second live event will take place in Portland, Oregon
on May 18th.
Both are part of a lecture series entitled
The Brain-Body Contract,
during which I will talk about science
and science-based tools,
many of which overlap with the topics covered
on the Huberman Lab Podcast,
but most of which will not
and will be completely new topics and tools
never discussed publicly before.
Both live events will also include
a question and answer period
during which you the audience can ask me questions directly
about any aspect of science or science-based tools
and I will attempt to answer them.
Tickets for the two events,
again, Seattle on May 17th and Portland on May 18th
are both available at HubermanLab.com slash tour.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Element.
Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need
and none of what you don't need, meaning sugar.
It has electrolytes and the main electrolytes
are sodium, potassium, and magnesium,
which you need in the proper ratios
in order for your brain and body to function correctly.
Element was designed to get you the proper ratio
of electrolytes in order to optimize mental
and physical performance.
People out there with pre-hypertension and hypertension,
of course, should be cautious
about increasing their sodium intake,
but many people can actually benefit
from increasing their sodium intake,
both for health and for performance.
Element contains a science-backed electrolyte ratio
of 1000 milligrams, that's one gram of sodium,
200 milligrams of potassium, and 60 milligrams of magnesium.
I consume Element when I first wake up in the morning,
during exercise, and after exercise,
and sometimes, again, if I've been sweating profusely,
for instance, after doing a sauna
or taking a run on a hot day, things of that sort.
If you'd like to try Element, you can go to Drink Element,
that's lmnt.com slash Huberman
to claim a free Element sample pack.
You only cover the cost of shipping.
Again, that's Drink Element, lmnt.com slash Huberman
to claim a free sample pack.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the factors
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be analyzed from a quality blood test.
There are a lot of blood and DNA tests out there,
but a major issue with many of them
is that you get numbers back about levels of hormones,
metabolic factors, lipids, et cetera,
but you don't know what to do with that information.
Inside Tracker has solved that problem
by creating a personalized dashboard.
So you take your blood and or your DNA test,
you get the results back
and where certain values might be too high
or too low for your preference,
you can click on that and it will direct you immediately
to lifestyle factors, nutrition and supplementation, et cetera
that can help you bring those numbers back into the ranges
that are ideal for you.
So it not only gives you information
about where your health stands,
it gives you directives as to how to improve your health.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
go to insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 20% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
That's insidetracker.com slash Huberman to get 20% off.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Roca.
Roca makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are the absolute highest quality.
I spent a lifetime studying the visual system.
I can tell you that your visual system
is incredibly sophisticated.
It allows you to do things like move
from a shady area outside to a sunny area outside
and to adjust your visual system
so you don't even notice that transition.
A lot of sunglasses and eyeglasses are not designed
with those sorts of biological transitions in mind.
Roca sunglasses and eyeglasses are different.
Every one of their glasses is designed
with the biology of the visual system in mind.
First of all, they're incredibly lightweight
so you don't even notice that they're on your face.
Second of all, they were designed to be worn
during activities like running and cycling, et cetera,
and they won't slip off your face even if you get sweaty
and they have a terrific aesthetic.
So even though they were originally designed
as active eyewear, they look great.
So you can wear them out to dinner,
to school, at work, et cetera.
If you'd like to try Roca sunglasses or eyeglasses,
you can go to Roca, that's R-O-K-A dot com
and enter the code Huberman to save 20% on your first order.
Again, that's Roca, R-O-K-A dot com
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
Okay, let's talk about heat.
More specifically, let's talk about the biology
of heat and heating and the health benefits
and tools related to heat and heating.
The first question that we have to answer
is how do we heat up?
And the answer to that question is we heat up two ways.
We heat up from the outside,
meaning the things that we come into contact with,
the clothing that we put on our body,
whether or not there's heat in the room
or whether or not it's cold outside or cold in a room,
and we heat up from the inside.
Our body has the capacity to generate more heat
or to cool down, meaning to turn off the heating process.
And it can do that in ways
that match the external environment.
The simplest way to think about this
is that we actually have two body temperatures.
People will say, oh, what's body temperature, 98.6.
That's actually not true.
Body temperature varies between individuals.
It varies across time of day within individuals.
And at every point across your entire lifespan,
you have two distinct temperatures.
One is the temperature on your skin,
what scientists call your shell,
and the temperature of your core,
your viscera, meaning your organs,
your nervous system, and your spinal cord.
And as you can imagine,
the temperature of your core is always higher
than the temperature at your surface.
So the important thing to know
is that you have a temperature at your shell
and a temperature at your core.
Now you don't need to know exactly
what those temperatures are in most cases,
but it is vitally important to understand
that you have those two temperatures
and that your brain is constantly sending out signals
to your body as to whether or not it should heat up
or cool down depending on the temperature of the shell,
which makes total sense.
This is a lot like a thermostat in a room,
which is essentially paying attention
to how cold or hot it is,
and then sending signals to the heating or cooling system
to either heat up the environment
or cool down the environment
depending on the temperature in that environment.
Your brain has neurons that send signals
to other cells in your body
and deploy the release of chemicals in your brain and body
to heat you up when you are too cold
and to cool you down when you are too hot.
So if you can understand that you have two body temperatures,
one at your shell, the surface,
and one at your core inside,
and that your body and brain are always trying
to balance those two temperatures in the appropriate way,
well, then you're halfway there
to understanding the biology
of thermal regulation and heating,
and you'll be a lot further along
in understanding how specific tools can be used
to improve metabolism or improve cognition, for instance.
In fact, later you will learn
that one way that you can heat up
is by cooling down the surface of your body.
That's right.
If I were to throw a cold towel, ice cold towel
onto your torso right now and ask you,
well, how do you feel?
You'd say, oh, that's cold, that's chilly.
However, because your brain is acting
like a bit of a thermostat,
as the surface, the shell of your body felt cool,
it would make sense that that thermostat
would activate biological mechanisms
that would heat up your core.
Similarly, if I were to put you into a very hot environment,
you'd say, oh, wow, it's really, really warm in here,
but your brain and your body
would go through a lot of effort
to activate mechanisms to cool you down.
So anytime we're talking about heat,
meaning deliberate heat exposure, things like sauna,
it's very important to understand not just the stimulus,
how hot something is, how long you're in a sauna, et cetera,
but the effect that has on your shell and on your core.
If you can understand that, you can design protocols
that are literally perfect for your goals.
And as a final point about this,
if you want to develop the best tools,
leveraging heat for your biology and health and performance,
you want to understand heat as a process, as a verb,
as heating, not just heat,
because there's the temperature that you are at
before you encounter the heat stimulus,
before you get in the sauna, for instance,
during the heat stimulus, so while you're in the sauna,
and then afterward.
Everything in biology is a process.
So as you'll soon learn,
there is a specific sauna protocol that can allow you,
can allow anybody in fact,
to increase the amount of growth hormone
released into their brain and body 16 fold.
That's right, 16 fold.
However, it involves shifting from a hot environment
to a cool environment, to a hot environment,
to a cool environment, over and over and over again,
over a very short period of time,
because it engages a switch, a process that compounds,
it builds on itself to increase growth hormone
further and further.
In fact, if you were to just get into a sauna
for a very long period of time and crank up the temperature
to match the exact temperature that was used in that study,
you would not experience those increases in growth hormone.
It really is the transition between hot
and cool temperatures that engage the process
of heating and reheating over and over again.
So today you're going to learn about the use of sauna.
You're going to learn about the use
of other heat related tools for health and optimization,
not just for growth hormone, but also metabolic health,
for controlling cortisol, even to impact mental health
in positive ways.
And in order to do that,
you need to understand a little bit about the mechanisms
of how you heat up and how you cool down,
where the cells and circuits are in the brain and body,
how those cells and circuits work.
I promised to make the description of that,
which follows very clear,
even if you don't have a background in biology.
And once you have that in hand,
along with the understanding you now have
about the fact that you got a shell and a core,
and you need to think about both the shell and the core,
well, then you will be in the best possible position
to use sauna or hot tub or other tools,
even just a hot shower,
as a powerful stimulus to optimize your biology.
Now, the science of heat and heating,
and cold and cooling for that matter,
goes back well over a hundred years.
In fact, it's kind of amusing to me
that nowadays there's a kind of renewed interest
in the use of heat and cold and the science of heat and cold
because this was the first topic
that I studied as an undergraduate.
And in fact, I did my graduate thesis on thermal regulation.
And at the time,
thermal regulation wasn't really considered
one of the hot topics in neuroscience.
People were more focused on things like memory
and consciousness,
and of course those topics are still of vital interest
to many people in many laboratories.
But thermal regulation was considered more,
I think for the physiologists.
Nowadays, not just on social media,
not just in the landscape of biohackers and athletes,
but in the landscape of mental health,
and frankly in the general ethos around health optimization,
people are really interested in heat and cold.
And the reason they're so interested in heat and cold
is that a lot of the science has been done
both in animal models in mice and in humans,
and translates immediately to protocols
that anyone can use.
Now, a brief warning now and another brief warning later,
anytime you're talking about heating up your body,
you need to be very cautious because unlike cooling down
where you have a fairly broad range of cold temperatures
that you can go into before it's damaging to tissue,
well, you don't get to heat up the brain and body very much
before you start getting into the realm of neuron damage.
And neurons in the central nervous system,
the brain and spinal cord,
once they're damaged, they don't come back.
So hyperthermia is a serious thing to avoid.
Later, I'll talk about ways to rapidly protect
against hyperthermia.
But I do want to give everybody a cautionary note upfront.
Obviously, if you're pregnant, nursing,
if you're very sensitive to hot environments,
you want to stay out of saunas and things of that sort.
I'm sure there are exceptions to that.
You definitely have to talk to your doctor
if you're going to violate that rule.
And for everybody, you want to approach
any kind of tool related to heating very cautiously.
You always have the opportunity
to increase the temperature later.
So proceed with caution, be smart about it.
I don't just say that to protect me,
I say that also to protect you.
So now let's talk about what are the circuits for heating up?
How does that happen?
Many of you have probably experienced a fever.
What happens when you go into a cold environment
and you're shivering, but you put on a coat
and then you feel warmer?
What's really going on there?
Well, there's a very basic circuit,
meaning neurons that exist in the skin,
in the brain and in the body
that communicate with one another,
that allow you to heat up if you need to
and cool down if you need to.
I'm going to throw a little bit of nomenclature,
a few new words at you.
You don't need to memorize these words except for one.
Actually you need to memorize one acronym,
but it's very easy.
It's called the POA.
If you remember POA,
you'll be home free for the rest of the episode.
But I know that there are some aficionados out there
and people interested in getting
a little bit deeper mechanism.
And I do think it's important to understand this circuit
because once you understand this circuit
and the way it's structured,
then you are going to be in a great position
to use the tools related to heating.
So here's how this circuit is structured.
You have this shell, which is basically skin.
And within the skin, you have neurons, nerve cells.
Those nerve cells have channels or receptors on them.
They're called trip channels.
There are some other ones as well,
which basically sense changes in heat.
So if I were to put a hot object on your hand or your arm,
or for instance,
if I were to put a hot object on your hand or arm
and then remove that hot object,
those neurons would respond to that.
They would send electrical signals into your spinal cord.
And that's where the next station of this circuit resides.
In your spinal cord, you've got a little cluster of neurons
that exists at the top part of your spinal cord
called the dorsal horn.
The name again doesn't matter.
And those neurons specifically relay heat information
up to another area of your brain.
Now here's where we get into some fancy names.
It's the lateral parabrachial area.
You don't need to know lateral parabrachial area,
but it's a relay station.
The lateral parabrachial area sends electrical signals
to the POA.
And I would like you to know POA.
The POA stands for preoptic area.
Neurons in the preoptic area
basically reside over the roof of your mouth.
These are neurons within the hypothalamus.
And neurons in the preoptic area
have the ability to send signals
out to the rest of your brain and body
to get you to heat up
and actually to change your behavior so that you heat up.
That's right.
If neurons in the preoptic area receive an electrical signal
through the circuit I just described
that goes from skin to dorsal horn in the spinal cord
to lateral parabrachial,
they will start sending signals
out to the organs of your body
and the tissues of your body
to get those organs and tissues to do things.
And believe it or not,
your POA, your preoptic area will actually change the way
that you think and feel immediately.
For instance,
if something warm contacts your skin
or something very hot contacts your skin,
the preoptic area will send signals
out to the endothelial cells,
the blood vessels, both of the brain and body
that get them to dilate, right?
To essentially increase their volume
and their surface area in order to cast off heat.
You will also start sweating.
That sweating response is initiated
not by the hot day or the hot sun,
but by the preoptic area neurons that send signals
out to what's called the periphery of your body
and other chemicals are released,
things like acetylcholine that get you to sweat.
And if you happen to be shivering,
neurons in the preoptic area will make sure
that you stop shivering.
You're probably familiar with the feeling
of being somewhat lethargic
or spreading out your limbs on a hot day.
Well, that is the result of neurons in your preoptic area
impacting your musculature
to get you to increase your surface area
so you can sweat off or release more heat.
So there are all these different mechanisms
by which we dump heat.
Some of those are purely physiological,
below our conscious control, things like sweating,
which you can't just make yourself sweat on demand.
Maybe you can through a set of stressful thoughts,
but you can't just make yourself sweat.
That is autonomic, it's below your conscious control.
Things like vasodilation,
the dilation of your veins in particular
and capillaries in particular, these sorts of things.
And of course, there are these behavioral,
somewhat voluntary aspects of dumping heat.
And the lethargy, the kind of tiredness
that we feel on a really hot day,
that's also controlled by this circuit
that I just described.
In fact, I just got back from a visit
to a very warm place.
And it was remarkable to me
how lethargic I felt in the afternoons.
I just felt like a total slug.
I just could not move or rally to do anything,
except if I waited until the evening,
even though it was later in the day,
even though I hadn't napped,
as the temperature in my environment cooled off,
as my body temperature cooled off,
I felt like I had more energy.
I was actually waking up
even though I had been awake for longer.
So the relationship between temperature and lethargy
is a very intimate one.
If we're warm enough, we feel active
and like we want to move around.
If we're too warm, we feel like we need to stay put
and spread out our limbs and dump heat.
And that brings me to a quick and kind of fun point
about how we dump heat versus how other animals dump heat.
Many of you know, of course, that we dump heat by sweating.
Other mechanisms as well, some of which I described,
but that's our main way of dumping heat.
Other animals like dogs don't have the capacity to sweat,
at least not very much.
So they pant, right, in order to dump heat.
And still other animals like rodents,
when they get too hot, they spit on their paws
and they rub that spit on the surface of their body,
which might sound kind of gross
and probably will get you to think twice
before petting any of those animals
or holding any of those animals again,
unless that's your thing.
Now, one other key thing to understand
about this circuit related to heat
is that the preoptic area
also can send electrical signals to the amygdala,
a brain area that is often talked about
in the context of fear,
but is really just a brain area
that can activate your sympathetic nervous system.
The sympathetic nervous system
is part of your autonomic nervous system
and is the one associated with fight or flight
or with the stress response,
or even just the excited response, right?
The sympathetic nervous system is also what gets activated
when you're really excited about something.
The preoptic area has the opportunity
to trigger the activation of the amygdala.
Now it doesn't do it every time, but it can.
And it tends to do that
when you are suddenly in an environment that feels too hot,
that you feel is risky levels of hot.
If you ever have gotten into a sauna
that was very, very hot, maybe 210 degrees Fahrenheit,
you sit there for a minute,
you'll notice that your heart rate increases
and there are reasons for that
and we'll talk about some of the health benefits of that
in a few minutes, but it's pretty uncomfortable.
You may not feel like your skin is going to burn up,
but you often will feel the impulse to get out,
especially if you stay in there for a little while.
That impulse is the consequence of this preoptic area
communicating with your amygdala saying,
hey, this environment is really hot
and I'm trying to cool down and it's not really working.
I'm dumping heat, but I'm not able to adjust
the core of my body temperature
in ways that are going to protect my neurons.
And so it's a signal that you probably shouldn't stay
in that environment too long.
Now later we'll talk about the advantage
of pushing yourself a little bit
through some of these very hot environments
provided you can do it safely,
but the impulse to get yourself out
of a very hot environment is the consequence
of the POA communicating with your amygdala
and the amygdala then in turn activating your adrenal glands
which sit right above your kidneys,
the release of adrenaline and this feeling of agitation
like you want to move.
Usually you want to move out
of whatever hot environment you happen to be in.
So now you know the circuit.
Again, it's simple.
It goes from skin to spinal cord,
one brain area to another brain area.
That's the key one in this discussion,
which is the POA, the preoptic area.
And the preoptic area can kick off a bunch
of autonomic subconscious responses to heat,
which make us attempt to get cooler,
things like sweating, vasodilation, et cetera.
And it can kick off behavioral responses,
spreading out our limbs in an attempt
to dump even more heat, feeling lethargic.
So a lack of desire to run and move.
And it also has the opportunity to kick off a mild
or maybe not so mild panic response to get us
out of that hot environment.
If you can conceptualize that circuit,
or if you can even just understand what I just said,
even at a top contour level,
you're going to be in a great position
to understand the rest of the information
and the tools that follow.
Next, I'd like to talk about the use
of deliberate heat exposure, including sauna,
but other tools as well,
as a way to understand how heat
and heating changes our biology.
So you're going to learn some mechanism
and you're going to learn some tools.
But first I'd like to just emphasize
that the use of deliberate heat exposure
can be a very powerful way to improve health and longevity.
There's a wonderful study on this that was published in 2018
that includes a lot of data from a lot of participants
in a lot of different conditions.
For instance, people that only did sauna once
versus two to three times a week
versus four to seven times a week and so on,
and compares all those.
The title of the study is sauna bathing
is associated with reduced cardiovascular mortality
and improves risk prediction in men and women,
a prospective cohort study.
This is one of several papers that clearly demonstrate
that regular use of sauna
or other forms of deliberate heat exposure
can reduce mortality to cardiovascular events,
but also to other events, things like stroke
and other things that basically can kill us.
What I like so much about this and the related studies
and yes, I will provide a link to these in the show notes
is that they involve a lot of participants.
So for instance, in this particular paper,
which was published in BMC medicine,
they looked at a sample of 1,688 participants
who had a mean age of 63,
but there was a range of ages around 63
and of whom 51.4% were women, the rest were men.
So it's a pretty nicely varied study
in terms of the populations that they looked at.
And basically what they found was the more often
that people do sauna, the better their health is
and the lower the likelihood they will die
from some sort of cardiovascular event.
Now, what do we mean by sauna?
We need to define some of the parameters around sauna
and I promise to provide you some alternative ways
to access some of the health benefits
that were observed in this and related studies
without the need to have a sauna
because I do realize that a lot of people
don't have access to sauna.
First off, the temperature ranges that were used
in this study and pretty much all the studies
that I'm going to talk about unless I say otherwise
are between 80 degrees Celsius,
meaning 176 degrees Fahrenheit and 100 degrees Celsius,
meaning 212 degrees Fahrenheit.
So somewhere in that range,
how hot should you make the sauna
or the environment that you get into
should you decide to use these tools?
Well, that will depend on your tolerance for heat,
how heat adapted you are.
Yes, some people are better at sweating than others
and over time, we all get better at sweating.
Meaning if you go into the sauna more frequently,
you become a better sweater.
Not a sweater you wear, but the verb, sweater.
You get better at sweating, at dumping heat
through the loss of water.
So it's going to depend.
I recommend starting on the lower end
of the temperature scale and if that's too hot for you,
that you even lower the temperature further.
Now, how long were people exposing themselves
to these hot environments?
Anywhere from five to 20 minutes per session.
And as you'll soon learn,
very brief periods of just five minutes of heat exposure
can be a powerful stimulus if the heat exposure
is significantly great enough for you, okay?
20 minutes can also be beneficial,
but 80 to 100 degrees Celsius,
meaning 176 degrees Fahrenheit to 212 degrees Fahrenheit
is the general range that this and most studies use.
In this particular study, they compare the effects
of people that did sauna once a week,
two or three times per week or four to seven times per week.
And what they saw was really remarkable.
What they observed was that people who went into the sauna
two or three times per week were 27% less likely
to die of a cardiovascular event
than people that went into the sauna just once a week.
Again, at the temperature levels
and the duration that I talked about earlier.
And as you can imagine,
the duration and the temperature levels were related.
So if people went into very hot environments
that were really uncomfortable for them,
maybe they only went in for five minutes.
Whereas if they were more comfortable and heat adapted
in a given environment or their tolerance for heat
was just simply higher for whatever reason,
well, then they tended to stay in longer.
We can take a sort of average of this five
to 20 minute range.
And today we're mainly going to talk about exposures
between 10 and 20 minutes at temperatures between,
again, 80 degrees and 100 degrees Celsius,
176 degrees Fahrenheit or 212 degrees Fahrenheit.
So these data point to the fact that going in the sauna
two or three times per week is really beneficial
and can lower mortality to cardiovascular events.
And in fact, the benefits were even greater
for people that were going into the sauna
four to seven times per week.
Those people were 50% less likely to die
of a cardiovascular event compared to people
that went into the sauna just once a week.
So these are really impressive
and frankly encouraging studies.
Certainly they caught my eye and encouraged me
to start using deliberate heat exposure on a regular basis.
What's particularly nice about this study
and the related study that again is linked in the show notes
is that they looked at a number
of potentially confounding variables,
things like whether or not people smoked,
things like whether or not people were overweight,
whether or not they tended to exercise or not exercise,
and they were able to separate out those variables.
So the percentages that I described earlier,
27% less likely to die of a cardiovascular event
for those that went in the sauna two to three times a week
and 50% less likely to die of a cardiovascular event
for those that went into the sauna four times per week
as compared to just once a week.
Those effects really do seem to be the consequence
of the sauna exposure and not some other effect
that's correlated with sauna exposure,
like going to the gym where people are working out
seven times a week and then also happen
to get into the sauna,
or quitting smoking right about the same time
they adopt a sauna protocol, these sorts of things.
And now there have been additional analyses
of the use of sauna for improving health,
or I should say for offsetting mortality
that have found that it's not just reductions
in cardiovascular events,
but so-called all cause mortality.
This is kind of medical geek speak.
We're saying, how likely are you or somebody to die
from a cardiovascular event,
but maybe also from some other event,
some other health-related event,
like cancer or something of that sort.
And in every case, regular exposure to sauna,
starting at about two or three times per week,
all the way up to seven times per week,
greatly improves,
meaning statistically significant improvements in longevity
in the sense that people are less likely to die
of cardiovascular events and other things that kill us.
So I and many other people who are interested,
not just in our own health,
but in educating about health-related tools
to the general public, find this really exciting.
But knowing what we know about how heat impacts our biology,
it probably shouldn't surprise us
that this sauna-type exposure or deliberate heat exposure
has these incredible effects.
So before we get into the biological mechanisms
of how heat can have all these impressive health effects,
I want to just talk about the use of sauna as a tool
and emphasize that you don't have to use a sauna
in order to get these benefits.
It is simply a matter of making sure
that your shell and your core heat up properly a bit,
not too much, not too little, but that you heat those up.
And no, you do not need to carry a thermometer around
or place a thermometer into your core.
You know, in laboratory studies and in humans,
if you really want to know someone's core temperature,
basically you try and put the thermal probe
as close to the core as you can.
So typically that's done rectally or a mouth thermometer
or even up the nose.
You don't need to do any of that, all right?
This isn't a laboratory study.
There are ways to create a hot environment
such that you heat up your shell and your core safely
without having to measure your core temperature all along.
If you want to do that, be my guest,
but I'm not going to provide a protocol.
So the question is, how are you heating up your environment?
And I realized that there are dry saunas,
there are steam saunas, there are infrared saunas,
there are hot tubs, and there are simply rooms
that you crank up the heat, okay?
There are also ways in which you can increase your shell
and your core temperature by moving around a lot
and doing that wearing a lot of clothing.
There's nothing special about any one
of these approaches or protocols.
It's just so happens that sauna is one
of the more convenient ways to do this.
And certainly for the studies that I've talked about,
not just the ones I referenced before,
but all the studies that I researched
looking at this episode,
it makes sense why they would use sauna
because it's very hard, for instance,
to create conditions where you have five people go out
jogging, wearing heavy sweaters and hats,
wool hats on the middle of summer.
It's very hard to set up those conditions
in a way that's controlled for everybody,
whereas it's pretty straightforward to have a sauna
where you have one or several people just get
into that one uniformly hot environment.
That's a much easier study to run.
So just to be clear, the temperature range is important.
You want to get between 80 and 100 degrees Celsius.
Now you know the conversion to Fahrenheit.
You could, however, immerse yourself in a hot tub
or hot water bath up to your neck.
That's another way to approach it.
If you didn't have access to either of those,
you could also put on a hoodie or a wool hat and a hoodie,
or you could do like the wrestlers do,
and you could actually buy one of these plastic suits.
They're literally called plastics that wrestlers
or other athletes that wish to drop water weight will wear
and then go jogging in that.
All of those will increase your shell
and your core body temperature, right?
Especially if you do it on a hot day,
but of course, be careful, hydrate and don't overheat,
don't become excessively hyperthermic
because you can get heat stroke and you can potentially die.
But if you're going to use sauna,
often I get the question, how hot should the sauna be?
Well, now you know.
How long should you be in there?
Five to 20 minutes per session.
Although I will talk in a minute about ways
to optimize hormone output,
in particular growth hormone output
by doing four very brief sessions.
So maybe not a continuous session.
We'll get into that in a few minutes.
And of course you have to ask yourself wet sauna, dry sauna.
You know what?
Doesn't matter.
Use what you prefer.
Many people ask me, well, what about infrared sauna?
We have an entire episode all about the use of light
and low level light therapy, including infrared light.
It does have certain benefits for skin and other organs
and tissues of the body if used properly.
My understanding, or at least my assessment
of most infrared saunas out there
is that they don't get hot enough.
They don't get up to that 80 to 100 degrees Celsius range.
Some do, most don't.
So what you end up with is a situation
where you've got a red light,
low level light therapy stimulus,
and you've got a sauna that's not quite hot enough.
And there are a lot of ideas and claims
about how they work together
in order to get you improved benefits.
I personally am of the stance
based on the literature that I've read
that you want to get into those ranges
of an 80 to 100 degrees Celsius
before you start considering whether or not
you're also going to include red light therapies, et cetera.
So there's nothing special about red light sauna.
It's really the temperature of the sauna
that you happen to get into.
So which tool, right?
Which sauna, which stimulus?
Do you run in wearing plastics and a hoodie and a wool hat?
Do you get into a sauna?
That's going to depend a lot on your circumstances,
your budget, and what you have access to on a regular basis.
This is a lot like our discussion about the use of cold.
Most of the studies have looked at immersion in cold water
up to the neck because that's a very controlled situation
that you can do in a laboratory.
They have not explored cold showers as much,
so there's just less data
or walking around in a cold environment.
But we'll talk a little bit about those data
because as you'll soon learn, when you talk about cold,
you're actually talking about heating as well.
So what kind of mechanisms are activated
in your brain and body that allow
for the various health benefits of sauna
or other forms of deliberate heating?
Well, we talked about reduced risk
of cardiovascular event-related mortality
and all-cause mortality.
As you'll soon learn, there are also tremendous benefits
in terms of increases in growth hormone,
reductions in cortisol, et cetera.
I will detail those.
So what happens when you get into a hot environment?
What are the mechanisms that allow
for the various health effects of that?
Well, your shell, your skin senses that,
and through the circuit that I described earlier,
activates neurons in the POA, the preoptic area,
which in turn activates mechanisms
in your autonomic nervous system like vasodilation.
So blood flow increases, plasma volume
of your blood increases, and stroke volume.
The volume of blood that is mobilized
with each beat of your heart also increases.
And your heart rate increases to anywhere
between 100 to 150 beats per minute.
That general constellation of effects looks
a lot like cardiovascular exercise.
And in fact, for all intents and purposes,
it really is cardiovascular exercise,
except that there isn't the mobilization
and the loading of joints and limbs and things of that sort.
And of course, there are additional benefits
of cardiovascular exercise that relate
to impact on the ground, improvements in bone density,
et cetera, et cetera.
But basically your heart starts beating,
more blood starts circulating,
your vasculature changes shape literally
to accommodate those increases in heart rate
and blood volume.
And you're basically getting a cardiovascular workout
in that hot environment, even if you're just sitting down.
Another set of positive effects related
to being in these hot environments are hormone effects.
Shifts in the output of hormones,
both from your adrenals and possibly from the testes
and ovaries, and even within the brain.
One of the more striking examples of that comes
from a study that was published in 2021.
The title of the study is endocrine effects
of repeated hot thermal stress
and cold water immersion in young adult men.
And indeed the study was in this case, just done on men.
I'll just briefly describe the protocol they use.
They had these men attend four sauna sessions
of 12 minutes each.
So again, well within that range of five to 20 minutes,
12 minutes, the temperature of those saunas
was 90 to 91 degrees Celsius.
So I'll just quickly do the calculation,
admittedly not in my head.
That's 194 degrees Fahrenheit.
And they did that four times.
Afterwards, they had a six minute cool down break
during which they did get into some cool water
or cold water of about 10 degrees,
which is 10 degrees Celsius is 50 degrees Fahrenheit.
And then they measured hormones at various times
throughout this study, before, during and after.
They looked at testosterone, they looked at DHEA,
which is in the androgen pathway.
They looked at prolactin and they looked at cortisol.
The significant effects of the protocol
that I just described were on cortisol,
a so-called stress hormone.
So-called because when we are very stressed
for long periods of time,
cortisol levels tend to increase dramatically.
But I should point out that a increase in cortisol each day
right about the time of waking
and specifically right about the time of waking
is actually beneficial for our alertness and our energy.
So having some increase in cortisol every 24 hours
is a good thing provided it happens early in the day.
Late day increases in cortisol
are associated with depression.
That's been shown by studies at Stanford and elsewhere.
The major effect of this study is a significant decrease
in cortisol output in these subjects.
I think this is really interesting and important
because many people suffer from acute,
meaning immediate and long-term stress
and are looking for ways to control their stress.
Controlling your cortisol is tricky.
In the episode on stress, I talked about supplements
such as ashwagandha that can be used to limit cortisol,
but you have to be careful not to use ashwagandha
for extended periods of time,
meaning for longer than two weeks,
because you can get into other issues.
I talk about breathwork protocols that can allow you
to clamp or reduce the stress response in real time.
Again, see that episode for those.
But many people are overworked, they're overstressed.
They're, for one reason or another,
they're subjected to many, too many stressors
or their level of stress resilience isn't high enough
to keep their cortisol levels clamped at a healthy level.
So the protocol I described of 12 minute exposures
to 90 degree environment, that's again, 90 degrees Celsius,
followed by a six minute cool down break in cool water,
50 degrees or so, that's pretty cold.
I can imagine that you could also just take a cool shower
or a cold shower afterwards.
That had a very significant effect on lowering cortisol.
So there you have a tool, it's not a completely zero cost
tool because you need to heat the water,
you need to have access to hot and cold water,
at least hot and cold contrast of some sort,
but it's fairly minimal cost for most people,
especially if you start getting creative
about maybe taking a 12 minute jog,
wearing a lot of clothing, if it's hot out,
then getting into a cool shower,
you might not get the same extreme or significant reduction
in cortisol that was observed here
with these very specific protocols,
but it's likely that you would get
a similar result overall.
Now, I mentioned they did look at these other hormones
and I'll just tell you that they did not see
significant shifts in testosterone,
prolactin, DHEA, et cetera, using this protocol.
As you'll soon see, there are other sauna protocols
that can impact those other hormones.
So if you're seeking to use sauna to reduce stress,
I think this is a very interesting
and potentially useful research backed protocol.
And again, we will provide a link to the paper
if you'd like to read more about the data.
So that is one set of biological effects on cortisol
and the related protocol.
What about some of the other benefits of sauna?
Well, we'll talk about those,
but I want to talk about those in the context
of the underlying mechanisms,
because if you understand those underlying mechanisms,
you can really tailor your sauna protocols
for your particular needs.
One of the more dramatic and important effects
of going into a hot environment for some period of time
is the activation of so-called heat shock proteins or HSPs.
Heat shock proteins are a protective mechanism
in your brain and body to rescue proteins
that would otherwise misfold.
Now, what do I mean by this?
Well, most of you are familiar with the fact
that you have protein in the kitchen,
like a steak or a piece of chicken or a piece of fish,
and you heat it up, it changes its texture, right?
Raw meat is different than cooked meat,
to be quite blunt about it.
Heat changes the quality of proteins,
not just in terms of how they taste,
but the way in which they are configured.
It changes it right down at the molecular level.
When your body goes through changes in temperature each day,
and we'll talk about those changes,
but in response to hot environments or cold environments,
heat shock proteins are deployed to go and rescue
and prevent the changes in proteins
that would be detrimental to your health.
So at least in the short term,
activating heat shock proteins is a good thing.
You don't want heat shock proteins to be activated
for long periods of time,
because that gets to be problematic for other reasons.
But these heat shock proteins,
of which there are many varieties,
basically have the job of traveling in your brain and body
and making sure that cells that contain proteins
that are misfolding because they got heated up too much,
don't misfold.
And they also serve a protective mechanism,
making sure that proteins within the cells
of your brain and body don't fold in the wrong ways.
Again, I'm describing this in very general terms,
but it's well-established in animal models and in humans
that sauna exposure of the sort that I described earlier
activates these heat shock proteins.
There's some interesting studies that were carried out
in animal models that really nicely mechanistically support
the role of heat shock proteins in some of the benefits
of deliberate heat exposure.
Some of these studies were done in flies,
meaning Drosophila fruit flies,
because they're a great model organism
because you can delete genes or add genes easily.
Other studies have been done in mice.
And now there are also studies being carried out in humans.
And I will talk about those.
One of the more dramatic examples
that's always touted in this field
of deliberate heat exposure as it relates to longevity
is that if they expose these flies, these fruit flies,
to 70 minutes of a heat stimulus
that obviously didn't kill them,
but activated heat shock proteins,
it could extend their life by 15%
in a heat shock dependent way.
Meaning if they made flies
that didn't have these heat shock proteins,
well, then they didn't see this extension in life.
And this is one of the reasons to use model organisms.
This is not an experiment that you could do in people.
However, there have been interesting studies done in humans
examining some of the downstream molecular pathways
of deliberate heat exposure that point to the mechanisms
by which deliberate heat exposure can help protect
against different forms of mortality,
improve health overall, and possibly,
and I want to highlight possibly, possibly extend life.
One such mechanism involves a genetic program
involving a molecule called FOXO3.
FOXO3 is a very interesting molecule
because it's involved in DNA repair pathways.
DNA repair is part of the process of remaining healthy.
We'd all like to think that we're born
and based on the genes we have,
we are healthy, healthy, healthy,
then eventually we age and then we die.
But from the time we're born until the time we die,
there's a constant repair of our proteins and our cells
and a modification of the genes that are being expressed.
You know, puberty being the most dramatic example, right?
You see a kid before puberty and after puberty,
he looks like a different kid, sounds like a different kid,
thinks like a different kid,
in fact, basically is a different human being, right?
It's not just the hormones,
it's that hormones themselves have the capacity
to turn on and turn off certain genes,
literally converting certain tissues
and cells in the brain and body
to do entirely different things.
So it's not just the sprouting of new aspects
of our biology, it's literally the conversion
of different brain centers from one function to another.
That's puberty and we'll do a whole episode about puberty.
We actually did an episode on sexual development
that talks a little bit about those mechanisms,
but the point is that throughout our entire lifespan,
genes are being turned on, genes are being turned off,
and DNA, the stuff of genes gets damaged in that process.
FOXO3 sits upstream in a pathway related to DNA repair
and again, clearing of these senescent cells.
Sauna exposure, in particular,
sauna exposure two to three times
or ideally four to seven times per week
in that 80 to 100 degree Celsius range
has been shown to upregulate levels of FOXO3.
FOXO3 in turn upregulates pathways related to DNA repair
and clearing out of these senescent or dead cells,
which is known to be important for various aspects
of maintaining cognition
and other aspects of maintaining health.
So these are the likely biological mechanisms
for the improvements in lifespan
or I rather, I should say,
these are the biological mechanisms
that apparently offset some of the cardiovascular risk
and other forms of mortality that were described earlier.
One especially interesting thing about FOXO3,
there are individuals out there
that have either additional copies of FOXO3
or who have versions of FOXO3 that are hyperactive,
so to speak.
Those people tend to be 2.7 times more likely
to live to 100 years of age or longer.
So these are people that were just naturally,
and fortunately for them,
endowed with more FOXO3,
more clearance of senescent cells,
more DNA repair, et cetera.
For the rest of us, at least to my knowledge,
I don't have one of these
health-promoting FOXO3 mutations.
Remember, mutations can be beneficial
or they can be detrimental.
This, if your goal is to live longer,
is a beneficial mutation.
Well, if you don't have these FOXO3 mutations
that allow you to be a centenarian
at 2.7 times higher likelihood than other people,
deliberate heat exposure is one way
that you can increase FOXO3 activity.
At this point in time,
meaning when looking at the research out there,
it isn't clear what the optimal SONNA protocol
is going to be specifically to increase FOXO3,
and that's probably because there isn't one.
There is no SONNA protocol designed
specifically to reduce cortisol
or specifically to increase FOXO3
or specifically to activate heat shock proteins.
Any deliberate heat exposure is likely
to impact all of those mechanisms.
Again, I encourage you to use this guide
of 80 to 100 degrees Celsius
as your kind of bookends for what you can tolerate
and where you want to start and eventually transition to
in terms of deliberate heat exposure.
And I would encourage you to use
that five to 20 minutes per session
for the SONNA as your rough guide
of how long to remain in the SONNA.
Now, there was a study published just this last year
that was mainly focused on deliberate cold exposure.
I detailed this quite extensively in the episode on cold.
This is the beautiful work of Susanna Soberg.
And that study looked at deliberate cold exposure,
but also SONNA exposure.
And that study found that 57,
yes, 57 minutes per week of SONNA exposure
in conjunction with 11 minutes per week total
of deliberate cold exposure was the threshold
for getting improvements in metabolism
and increases in brown fat,
this very active fat tissue
that improves mitochondrial function and thermogenesis,
meaning heating of the body.
We'll talk more about the brown fat later.
Why do I mention this?
Well, for those of you that are interested
in increasing metabolism,
it does seem to be most beneficial
to do that 11 minutes per week of cold exposure.
Again, divided up across two or more sessions.
So it's not 11 minutes all at once, but shorter sessions.
And to get 57 minutes minimum per week of SONNA exposure,
again, in the temperature ranges
that I've talked about here.
And again, it's not 57 minutes in the SONNA all at once.
That's 57 minutes total per week as the minimum threshold.
So you might divide that into three sessions of 20 minutes.
And again, I don't think 57 is the magic number.
It could be 60, it could be 64, it probably could be 55.
Remember your biological systems
are not counting things off minute by minute,
second by second, at least not in most cases.
So for those of you that are interested
in improving metabolism, check out the episode on cold,
or just take the SOBERG protocol as I call it,
which is 11 minutes total per week
of uncomfortably cold, but safe cold exposure.
So uncomfortably cold means you really,
really want to get out of the shower or the ice bath
or whatever environment, but you can stay in.
11 minutes total per week divided across a couple of sessions
and then 57 minutes per week or so
of deliberate heat exposure.
Again, uncomfortably, but uncomfortably hot, excuse me,
but safe to stay in,
probably divided up across three or more sessions.
Okay, so we've talked about the use of SONNA
to decrease cortisol.
We've talked about the use of SONNA
to increase heat shock proteins.
We've talked about the use of SONNA to increase FOXO3.
Now I'd like to talk about the use of SONNA
to increase growth hormone.
Growth hormone is a hormone that we all naturally secrete
from our pituitary,
which also resides near the roof of our mouth.
The signal for the pituitary to release growth hormone
arrives from neurons that exist in the hypothalamus.
So growth hormone releasing hormones,
believe it or not, that's what they're called,
stimulate the release of growth hormone
from the anterior pituitary gland
into the general circulation.
And then growth hormone impacts metabolism
and growth of cells and tissues of the body.
It is responsible for tissue repair as well.
And the growth spurt that everyone experiences
during puberty is the consequence of growth hormone.
What I'm about to describe is a study
that found dramatic, really dramatic, I should say,
increases in growth hormone.
But I also want to emphasize
that these increases in growth hormone
were not of the sort that are observed in puberty
or in infants becoming adolescents
or adolescents growing into teenagers.
Those levels of growth hormone
that are associated with those massive transformations,
excuse me, of body morphology, of shape,
are far greater than the sorts that I'm talking about here.
And yet, as all of us age,
when we go from adolescence to our teenage years
and then into young adulthood,
but then starting in our early 30s or so,
the amount of growth hormone that we secrete
is greatly diminished.
Normally, we would release growth hormone every night
after we go to sleep,
in particular in the early part of the night
when our sleep is comprised mostly of slow wave sleep.
As we age, less growth hormone is released
during that slow wave sleep.
There are various things
that can promote the release of growth hormone,
and we will talk about
some of those other things in a moment.
Things like low blood sugar, it turns out,
is a stimulus for growth hormone release.
And I don't mean hypoglycemia of the sort
that makes you dizzy and want to pass out, that's bad.
I mean, not having high levels of glucose
and insulin in your bloodstream.
This is one of the reasons
why many people are drawn to intermittent fasting
or even prolonged fasting.
It's because of the reported increases in growth hormone.
I'll touch on those briefly,
but if you want to learn more about those
and what their real impact is
and the extent of growth hormone,
check out the episode I did on fasting.
You can find that at hubermanlab.com.
Certain forms of exercise have also been shown
to stimulate growth hormone release.
And in a few moments,
I'll talk about how exercise and fasting can be combined
or how heat can be combined with exercise
or certain patterns of food intake
to further increase growth hormone.
But before I do that, I want to review some of the data
and one study in particular that discovered
certain forms of deliberate heat exposure using sauna
can stimulate very large increases in growth hormone output,
which for people in their 30s, 40s and beyond
could be very useful and may also be useful
for people who are just trying to stimulate
the release of more growth hormone in order to,
for instance, recover from exercise or stimulate fat loss
or muscle growth or repair of a particular injury.
The title of this paper is endocrine effects
of repeated sauna bathing.
And this is a paper that was published in 1986,
which is some years ago,
but nonetheless serves as a basis
for a lot of other studies that followed.
So let me describe what they did in the study.
They used an 80 degree Celsius environment.
So that's 176 degrees Fahrenheit.
And they had subjects do this sauna for 30 minutes,
four times per day.
So that's two hours total in one day,
30 minutes in the sauna, a period of cool down rest,
30 minutes in the sauna again, cool down rest,
a third and a fourth time, okay?
So two hours total in this 80 degree Celsius environment.
So that's a lot,
but what they observed was really quite significant.
So they had subjects do this protocol
and I should mention they had both male
and female subjects in the study.
And the entire study lasted a week.
They did this two hours of sauna exposure on day one,
day three and day seven of that week.
And they measured a lot of different hormones,
cortisol, thyroid stimulating hormone,
thyroid hormone itself, luteinizing hormone
and follicle stimulating hormone,
which are hormones that essentially drive
the production of other hormones.
We won't get into that too deeply,
but if you'd like to learn about FSH,
follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone,
please see the episode on optimizing testosterone
and estrogen at hubermanlab.com.
They looked at prolactin and they looked at growth hormone.
I'll just cut to the chase and tell you
the effects on growth hormone.
In subjects that did this two hour a day,
80 degree Celsius protocol,
experienced 16 fold increases in growth hormone.
So they measured growth hormone before the sauna
and after the sauna and growth hormone levels
went up 16 fold, which is obviously an enormous
and it turns out statistically significant effect.
Now, one important caveat here.
Remember earlier when I talked about people who did sauna
once a week versus two to three times a week
versus four to seven times a week.
And the more often people did sauna,
the less likely they were to die of cardiovascular events
or other things of that sort.
Well, in this case, the effects of sauna exposure
on growth hormone actually went down
the more often that people
did this deliberate heat exposure.
So as I mentioned, they did this two hour a day
dividing the 30 minute sessions protocol on day one,
day three and day seven of a week.
And what they found was on day one,
there was a 16 fold increase in growth hormone.
On day three however,
there was still a significant effect on growth hormone
as compared to before sauna,
but that effect was basically cut by two thirds.
So now instead of getting a 16 fold increase,
it was more like a three or four fold increase,
which is still a huge increase,
but not as great as the increase observed on day one.
And then on day seven, there tended to be a two,
maybe a three fold increase,
but not as great as the one observed on day one.
What does this mean and why does this happen?
Well, the reason this happens is because heat,
just like cold is a shock or a stressor to the system.
In the context of cold,
if you get into a very cold ice bath, for instance,
a five degree ice bath, even for 20 seconds,
it's known to increase norepinephrine 200%.
It can double the amount of norepinephrine
that you suddenly release into your brain and body,
which actually can have some positive effects.
I'll talk about those in a little bit.
But if you were to do that every day,
you become cold adapted.
This circuit that compares the shell and core of your body
would adjust in ways that it could either predict
that cold stimulus or more likely to create
some thermogenic mechanisms in preparation
for that cold exposure.
This is why, for instance,
people that use deliberate cold exposure
to try and increase lipolysis, the burning of fat,
oftentimes will get results for a while,
but then if they're doing it a lot, a lot,
they stop getting those effects.
I talk a lot about avoiding cold adaptation
if that's your goal in the episode on cold,
but similar mechanisms are at play here.
So we have to imagine that when these subjects
got into the sauna on day one,
whatever pathways went from measurement of temperature
at the shell to changes in temperature at the core
led to these big increases in growth hormone,
which is basically a way of just describing the result
I already told you before.
But the fact that that result diminished over time
either means that the circuit was not as efficient
in communicating that shift in temperature
or that that shift in temperature was of less impact
because the downstream effectors
were not engaged to the same extent
because it wasn't as much of a shock.
And I think the latter explanation is far more likely.
This is very much akin to weight training
or cardiovascular exercise,
where if you run up a hill very fast, for instance,
and your lungs are burning
and you're heaving and breathing hard,
on the first day, that's a very painful thing.
But if you do it every day or every other day,
provide you allow yourself to recover,
pretty soon you're running up that hill
and you're not breathing as hard.
There isn't much burning in your muscles,
et cetera, et cetera.
Your body adapts.
So one of the key things to understand
about the use of deliberate heat exposure
is if you're going to use it in order to try
and trigger massive increases in growth hormone,
you're going to need to be careful
about not doing it more than let's say once a week.
Now I'm extrapolating from this study,
maybe once every 10 days would be even better.
But if you start getting heat adapted,
it's very unlikely that you're going to get
these massive increases in growth hormone.
So I don't mean to be discouraging
of using deliberate heat exposure
to access growth hormone increases,
but if that's your specific goal or your main goal,
then I think it's reasonable to say
that you don't want to do deliberate heat exposure,
at least not of the sort that I described here,
more than once a week, or maybe even once every 10 days.
And that you would want to time that
to other events in your life,
maybe hard workouts,
or if you're trying to push through a fat loss barrier,
or simply in order to access growth hormone at peak levels,
maybe three times per month or four times per month.
If you start doing deliberate heat exposure more often,
you'll still get increases in growth hormone,
but they are not going to be nearly as large
as the increases in growth hormone
that you're going to experience
if you shock your system with deliberate heat exposure
every once in a while.
An important way to frame this
is actually in the context of cold.
And while you might say, wait,
this is an episode on heat and heating, not cold.
You really can't have a conversation about heat and heating
without talking about cold,
because as I mentioned earlier,
if you cool the outside of your body, the shell,
you're actually heating up your body.
In fact, the circuits that control heating of the body
and that control cooling of the body,
for instance, the activation of things like shiver
or fat loss in response to cold and shiver,
those are also controlled by the preoptic area
of the hypothalamus.
So we can take a step back and start to think about
what it would take to design the optimal protocol
for deliberate heat exposure by looking at cold.
And here's what I mean.
There have been beautiful studies showing
that if people get into a very cold body of water,
four degrees Celsius for 20 seconds,
as I mentioned earlier,
that will cause a 200 to 300% increase in norepinephrine.
Norepinephrine is also called noradrenaline
and norepinephrine and other so-called catecholamines
like dopamine increase dramatically
in this very brief cold water exposure.
And those increases in norepinephrine and dopamine
are known to have long lasting effects
that generally to improvements in mood, focus and alertness.
They're pretty significant.
However, they aren't significant enough
to increase metabolism to a very high degree.
Whereas other studies have shown that if people go outside
in 16 degrees Celsius weather with a proper amount,
but a fairly minimum amount of clothing,
you can experience even greater increases in norepinephrine.
But the time that's required
in order to experience those increases
is six hours at, for instance, 16 degrees Celsius.
So if you have six hours a day to be out there in the cold,
or if you're going to turn the air conditioning on
in an environment, make it very, very cold, fine.
But basically what I'm describing
is that you can sort of bookend the parameters
that you can use.
You can use a very brief exposure to cold or to heat
in order to stimulate heat shock proteins,
growth hormone, et cetera.
Or you can use longer exposure
in less intense versions of heat and cold.
You really have to find what's going to work for you
and what you can do safely.
And if you're confused about where to start,
please use the parameters that I described earlier.
First of all, check with your doctor as always,
make sure that you're somebody
who can do deliberate cold or heat exposure safely.
But that 80 to 100 degrees Celsius,
meaning 176 degrees Fahrenheit to 212 degrees Fahrenheit
I keep repeating over and over
because I know somebody is going to ask
even though I repeat it over and over, which is fine.
I'm delighted to keep saying it
and to respond if someone asks again.
Well, those parameters are going to kind of bookend
what you should do in terms of the intensity
of the heat stimulus.
How long?
Well, we heard earlier, five to 20 minutes.
Why not start with five and then ramp it up to 10 or 15?
And then if you're feeling really bold
and you really want to crank out growth hormone,
well then you could do that 30 minute,
four times in one day stimulus every once in a while.
So you have to really figure out
what you're using heat exposure for.
This is one of the reasons why when people say,
is it better to get in a wet sauna or dry sauna?
What's the optimal temperature?
Is it better to take a hot shower or a hot bath
or a hot tub?
To be completely honest,
it depends on what you're going to be able to do regularly,
whether or not you want to do it regularly
and what your specific goals are.
So the purpose of this episode is really to arm you
with the underlying mechanisms
and to arm you with the general parameters
that are going to allow you to access the results
that you're seeking.
For what it's worth, I personally use a protocol
and I've been using a protocol for a long time
that involves trying, meaning I accomplish this most weeks,
not all, trying to get into a sauna
for three 20 minute sessions every week.
I use a dry sauna, so it's not a steam room.
If I don't have access to it,
I might take a hot bath or something of that sort.
But in general, I just stick to doing the sauna
three times a week.
And I generally will do that either after a workout,
either a cardiovascular workout or a weight workout,
or I'll do it later in the evening.
Why later in the evening?
Well, it has to do with the circadian shifts in temperature
that we all experience.
Talked a lot about this in the circadian episodes
and the episodes related to sleep,
but in a nutshell, here's how it works.
Every early morning,
about two hours before your typical wake-up time,
your body temperature is at its all time lowest.
Okay, we call that your temperature minimum.
Right about waking, your body temperature increases.
In fact, an increase in body temperature
is part of the reason you wake up at all,
unless of course you're setting an alarm.
Increases in body temperature are going to be
one of the major things that wakes up your brain and body.
Body temperature will tend to continue
to increase through the morning.
You'll get that increase in cortisol,
that's a healthy increase in cortisol.
Body temperature will increase into the afternoon
and then will start to drop in the later afternoon.
This general contour can be shifted
by whether or not you exercise,
how often you eat
because of the so-called thermogenic effects of food.
That is every time you eat,
there's a slight increase in body temperature and metabolism,
but it's not really that significant
to throw off this general contour and rhythm.
But toward the afternoon, around four or five o'clock,
most days, depending on time of year,
your body temperature will peak
and then it will start to drop.
And as your body temperature drops by one to three degrees,
and here I'm referring to your core body temperature,
not your shell body temperature,
you will start to get sleepy
and to transition into sleep
and to maintain sleep throughout the night,
your body temperature will remain low
until you hit that temperature minimum
and then it'll start to come up again, okay?
What that means is that when you decide to do sauna
or cold exposure for that matter is going to be important.
Why?
Well, as I mentioned earlier,
if you were to make the surface of your body cold,
at least in the immediate period after that,
your body temperature will increase.
So for those of you that are challenged
in getting to sleep and are still working on your sleep,
remember, sleep is the foundation
of all mental and physical health and optimal performance.
You should try to get really quality sleep
of sufficient duration at least 80% of nights.
That should be an ongoing goal throughout your lifespan
for a huge number of reasons.
Watch the master sleep episode
if you'd like to hear more of those reasons
and the mechanisms to make sure that you do that.
But in any event, cold exposure late in the evening
will start to increase your body temperature again.
And that can make it hard for some people to fall asleep.
Now, if you're very, very tired
because you've been working hard or training hard
or both throughout the day,
might not throw off your sleep so much.
I've gone through bouts where I'm just so, so busy
from morning till night
that the only time I can get into the ice bath
or the cold shower is late in the evening
and I have no trouble sleeping after that.
However, if you have trouble sleeping,
I would recommend doing the cold exposure early in the day
to match that natural heating,
that natural increase in body temperature
that occurs across the 24 hour so-called circadian rhythm.
Similarly, if you're going to use deliberate heat exposure,
you'd be wise to do that later in the day.
You'd be wise to do it later in the day
because when you get into a warm environment,
sure, the surface of your body, the shell heats up,
the core of your body heats up,
but then it also activates cooling mechanisms
through the preoptic area.
And when you get out of that hot environment,
sauna or otherwise,
your body will continue to cool down.
And so many people find that if they do sauna
in the later half of the day or even just before sleep
and then take a warmish shower afterwards,
then they find it easier to fall asleep.
And that makes sense
because their body temperature is dropping.
And in fact, if your goal is to really promote
the maximum amount of growth hormone release,
that's also going to be the best time of day to do it,
especially if you haven't eaten
in the two hours before sleep, okay?
So if you're really going for growth hormone release,
you're really trying to optimize sleep
and the two things are actually linked
because of the release of growth hormone
that happens from the pituitary in the early night's sleep,
well, then you would be wise to do your sauna
maybe once or maybe twice a week in the evening
or at nighttime than taking a warm or cool shower
just briefly, just enough to kind of rinse off all the sweat
from the sauna and then get ready for sleep.
And to do that, not necessarily fasted,
but to try and keep your levels of glucose and insulin
somewhat low in your bloodstream.
The reason I say that is that having elevated blood glucose
and or insulin tends to blunt
or reduce growth hormone release.
And that's true for any number of different stimuli,
including exercise and including sauna.
So there's a really nice study on this
that I can point you to is this study
that was published in the journal Stress,
literally that's the name of the journal.
I love it when journals have these names like pain
or stress, I find that somewhat amusing for reasons
that escape me, but nonetheless, amuse me.
The title of this study is growth hormone response
to different consecutive stress stimuli in healthy men.
Is there any difference?
And I don't want to go into all the details of the study
because it's pretty extensive and complicated,
but basically what they did is that they had people do sauna
and then gave them a drug or a condition of having low,
not dangerously low, but low blood sugar,
or they had them in a condition where they had
low blood sugar and then did sauna,
or they had them do an exercise protocol
that led them to increase growth hormone
and then had them do low blood sugar,
basically mixing and matching the various stimuli
that could increase growth hormone.
And what they found was very straightforward.
What they found was that doing sauna once
and then waiting some period of time,
and then later that day doing sauna again,
they didn't see the same increase
in growth hormone both times.
First, they got a big increase in growth hormone
and then less if they did sauna again.
If they had people do exercise and then sauna,
what they found was exercise could stimulate growth hormone,
but then following it with sauna did not allow you
to get twice as much growth hormone.
In general, anytime you release growth hormone,
you reduce the likelihood that you're going to release
growth hormone again later that day.
And this partially explains that earlier study
where if people did this growth hormone promoting protocol
on day one, but then on day three,
they didn't see quite as big an effect,
and on day seven, they didn't see quite as big an effect.
All it basically boils down to is that
if you really want to crank out the most amount
of growth hormone in response to sauna,
do it fasted or at least not having ingested any food
in the two or three hours before.
You don't have to be deep into a fast.
And the whole notion of what breaks a fast
is kind of an interesting conversation
because it's contextual, right?
Will a sip of coffee break your fast?
Well, maybe, probably not.
Will one grain of sugar break your fast?
No.
Will an entire candy bar break your fast?
Yes, it has to do with where your blood glucose is
when you ingest that particular food item,
not so much what that food item is per se.
But the bottom line here is if you want to crank out
the most amount of growth hormone,
wait a couple of hours after eating
before getting into the sauna,
or maybe do it before dinner and then prepare dinner,
do the sauna before dinner that is,
then prepare dinner, then eat dinner,
and then make sure that you wait a few hours
before going to sleep.
You're going to have to arrange your schedule accordingly.
I know most people can't arrange their schedule perfectly
just to get growth hormone increases,
nor do I think people should approach
health protocols that way.
I think for 90% of people, 90% of the time,
just getting into the sauna once or twice
or three times a week is going to be beneficial
for the number of reasons that I described earlier.
And you don't want to obsess too much
about the exact conditions you need
in order to get the greatest effect
out of that sauna treatment.
These are just some additional tweaks
related to food intake and low-level hypoglycemia
and exercise that if you wanted to leverage, you could.
So if decreases in body temperature
tend to aid the transition to sleep,
and getting out of a hot sauna
tends to promote decreases in body temperature,
it makes sense why you would want to put your sauna exposure
or other deliberate heat exposure
in the second half of your day
and maybe even right before sleep.
Now, regardless of what time of day you do sauna
or how frequently you do it,
you're going to want to hydrate after going in the sauna.
When you go in the sauna, you lose water,
and when you lose water, you need to replace it.
Why?
Well, you need water for all your cells,
but you also need electrolytes.
So make sure that you're replacing the water
that you lose in the sauna.
Now, there's no exact formula of how much water to drink
and whether or not you need electrolytes
in that water or not.
It's going to depend on how much you sweat,
meaning how heat adapted you are.
It's going to depend on how much salt you tend to excrete
in your sweat, huge amount of variation.
But in general, one way to approach this
would be to make sure that you drink
at least 16 ounces of water for every 10 minutes
that you happen to be in the sauna.
You could do that before and during and after,
you could do it during and after, or you could do it after.
Now, there are other reasons to do deliberate heat exposure
that have nothing to do with cardiovascular effects,
nothing to do with growth hormone or anything of that sort,
but rather have to do with improvements
in mood and mental health.
In fact, the data related to sauna
and other forms of deliberate heat exposure improving mood
are very impressive, both at the mechanistic level
and in terms of the long-term consequences
that people experience.
First of all, we need to ask,
how is it that deliberate heat exposure
can improve our mood and wellbeing?
Well, it turns out that it improves mood and wellbeing,
but it also improves our capacity to feel good
in response to things
that would ordinarily make us feel somewhat good.
Now, this is not a situation
where you're going to be walking around,
grinning ear to ear in response to nothing at all,
simply because you went in a sauna.
What I'm talking about is the upregulation of pathways,
meaning chemical pathways in your brain and body
that allow you to experience pleasure in all its fullness.
So here's how this whole deliberate heat exposure,
sauna, mood thing works.
Many of you have probably heard of endorphins.
Endorphins are a category of molecules
that are made naturally in your brain and body,
and that are released in response to different forms
of stressors.
That's right, in response to stressors.
So if ever you've gone out on a long run,
and at some point in that run,
you feel like you're aching and your joints hurt,
or maybe you have shin splints,
and you push through that,
part of the reason that you experience
a lack of pain at some point, usually,
or you experience a euphoria during or after that exercise
is the exercise-induced effects on endorphin release,
or rather, to be more specific,
I should say the exercise-induced consequences
on the stress system,
which in turn trigger the release of endorphin.
In other words, when we experience short-term
or acute stress, the endorphin system is activated.
Now, the endorphin system is not just about feeling good,
believe it or not, it's also about feeling bad.
And there are two general categories of endorphins.
The first are the ones that you normally hear about,
endorphins, things that bind, for instance,
to receptors like the mu opioid receptor.
Opioids are not just prescribed compounds
or, unfortunately, drugs of abuse, which they are, right?
We have this opioid crisis in the United States
and elsewhere, which is a very serious and tragic thing,
but we make endogenous opioids.
We make endorphins that naturally act as pain relievers
and that make us feel mildly euphoric.
We also make endorphins such as dynorphin,
that's D-Y-N-O-R-P-H-I-N, dynorphin,
that actually make us feel worse in response to stressors.
When we get into a hot sauna
or a hot environment of any kind,
dynorphins are liberated in the brain and body.
And I should mention that dynorphins are made
by many neurons in many different areas of the brain.
So you might think, well, why would I want that?
Why would I want to release dynorphin into my brain and body?
Well, first of all, when you get into an uncomfortably
hot situation, uncomfortably hot scenario,
oh gosh, this is sounding terrible,
in a deliberately hot environment
that you are using to try and trigger
some sort of biological or psychological benefit,
I should say, the discomfort that you feel,
the desire to get out of that environment
is in part the consequence of the release of dynorphin.
It's also the consequence of the activation
of that sympathetic nervous system.
Remember, the preoptic area can communicate
with the amygdala and trigger that kind of fight
or flight mode, I want to get out of the sauna,
this is really, really hot.
But dynorphin is also liberated
from a certain number of neurons.
Dynorphin binds to what's called the kappa receptor.
The kappa receptor binds dynorphin
and triggers pathways in the brain and body
that lead to agitation, to stress,
and believe it or not, to a general sense of pain.
This is why you want to get out of the hot sauna.
And remember, if it's unsafe levels of hot,
then you should get out of that sauna
or other hot environment.
But if you're working in a range
or you're exposing yourself to a range of heat
that's uncomfortable but safe to be in,
dynorphin will be liberated from these neurons,
bind to the kappa receptor,
and as a downstream consequence of that,
there will be an increase in the receptors
that bind the other endorphins,
the endorphins that make you feel soothed,
that make you feel happy,
and that make you feel mild euphoria.
So there've been a number of studies showing that initially
deliberate heat exposure by sauna or otherwise
causes the release of dynorphin.
In fact, I think it's fair to say
that every time we get into a hot environment
that's uncomfortable or a cold environment
that's uncomfortable,
dynorphin is likely released
and binding to the kappa receptor.
But over time,
that binding of dynorphin to the kappa receptor
leads to downstream changes
in the way that the feel-good endorphins,
things like endorphin binding to the mu opioid receptor,
and there are still other feel-good endorphins,
so to speak.
That system becomes much more efficient
such that people feel an elevation
in their baseline level of mood,
and when a good or happy event comes along,
they feel a heightened level of happiness or joy or awe
or improved mood in response to that.
This is not unlike the effects of caffeine
on the dopamine receptor that I've described previously,
and for those of you that aren't familiar with it,
many of you drink caffeine and love it.
Part of the reason you love it
is because of the release of certain neurochemicals
like norepinephrine, et cetera,
the energy that it gives you,
maybe the taste, I would hope as well,
but caffeine ingestion also causes increases
in dopamine receptor concentration and efficacy.
In other words, it allows the receptors for dopamine
to work better so that for a given amount
of dopamine release,
you experience more pleasure and motivation.
This is a similar mechanism,
but within the endorphin pathway.
So what does it mean?
It means that a little bit of discomfort
as a consequence of deliberate heat exposure,
while in the short term doesn't feel good by definition,
it is activating pathways that are allowing
the feel-good molecules and neural circuitries
that exist in your brain and body
to increase their efficiency,
placing you in a better position to be joyful
in response to the events of life.
I confess I'm very excited about the data
on deliberate heat exposure and improvements
in the chemical systems that underlie good mood.
And just to underscore this further,
the dynorphin system is not unique to heat-induced stress.
In fact, there are beautiful studies and reviews out there
about the role of dynorphin in stress and depression,
in stress and alcoholism, just as a brief aside,
and in the future, we will do a whole episode
on alcohol and alcoholism,
but turns out that chronic alcohol use and alcoholism
causes changes in dopamine receptors
that make it very difficult for people to achieve pleasure
through things other than alcohol and even alcohol.
That's kind of the really diabolical nature of addiction,
which is the thing that initially brings pleasure,
eventually is just required to maintain
baseline levels of dopamine.
And I've talked before, and Dr. Anna Lemke,
when she was a guest on this podcast,
talked about the pleasure plane balance
that exists within the dopamine system.
And it's beautifully described in her book,
Dopamine Nation, by the way,
excellent book I recommend to all people, addicts or not.
Well, in that context of pleasure and pain,
it's very clear what the pleasure molecule is.
It's actually a molecule more related to motivation,
and that's dopamine.
The pain molecule, however, appears to be dynorphin.
And the fact that dynorphin is dysregulated
in stress and depression and alcoholism,
and the relationship between dynorphin and dopamine
is something that we should all take very seriously.
And for that reason, I'm very excited about the fact
that deliberate heat exposure
can leverage the dynorphin system
in a short-term and acute way
that allows mood to improve after the sauna exposure.
So for those of you that don't like heat exposure,
keep in mind that a lot of the observed positive effects
on our biology relate to metabolism,
cardiovascular function, but also mental health.
And along those lines, there's a wonderful study,
again, published in 2018.
I don't know why, I guess 2018 was a big year
for deliberate heat exposure studies.
The title of this study is Sauna Bathing
and Risk of Psychotic Disorders.
And this was a prospective cohort study.
Again, we'll provide a link to this study.
It's a really interesting study
that explored the relationship between mental health,
so people suffering from various forms of psychosis,
schizophrenia and other forms of psychosis, and use of sauna.
So essentially what this study did
is they looked at a very large number of subjects,
more than 2,000 subjects,
who had no history of psychotic disorders.
They were classified into three groups
based on their frequency of sauna use,
either once a week, two to three times per week,
or four to seven times per week.
This should call to mind that earlier study
on all risk mortality and cardiovascular event risk.
And then they explored the hazard ratio
for psychosis specifically,
meaning how likely it was that people
would develop psychotic symptoms
or full-blown psychotic illness
according to their frequency of sauna session.
So again, this isn't causal, this is correlative.
And according to the data in this study,
what they concluded is that there was a strong
and inverse independent association
between frequent sauna bathing and the future risk
of psychotic disorders in this population.
Now, this does not mean that going into a sauna
seven times per week is going to prevent people
from becoming schizophrenic necessarily,
or from having a psychotic episode necessarily.
And of course, frequent sauna use will be related
to other health promoting activities.
But in this study, as in the previous study,
they went to great lengths in order to try
and limit those so-called confounding variables.
Now, of course, this is just one study.
And again, it's correlative, not causal,
but based on the large number of subjects they included,
plus the rigor of the statistical analysis,
we're starting to see a general picture
that using the sorts of sauna protocols
that I've described throughout this episode,
five to 20 minutes or so done one to seven times per week
is associated with a general improvement
in cardiovascular health,
a general improvement in mental health.
And it really points to the fact that yes,
sauna done acutely for three or four times a day,
30 minutes each session separated by a cooling,
maybe getting into cold bath.
Sure, that can potently increase growth hormone,
but done on a more regular basis can reduce cortisol,
improve heart health, improve mental health.
And for that reason, and the fact that for most people,
it is conceivable to come up with a way
that you could get into deliberate heat exposure
for a minimum of cost, right?
It's a hot bath, or if you had to resort to, you know,
bundling up and going for a jog, this sort of thing,
or if you have access to it, a sauna of some sort,
that we're really talking about a stimulus
to initiate a large number of different biological cascades
that wick out to improve multiple aspects
of brain and body health.
So up until now, I've been talking about whole body heating.
So for instance, putting your whole body into the sauna,
which of course is what most people do,
or getting into a hot tub or hot bath up to your neck,
or in the cases where we were talking about
deliberate cold exposure as a means to increase
core body temperature and metabolism,
getting into an ice bath or cold water of some sort
up to your neck or into a cold shower, et cetera.
Now I'd like to talk about deliberately heating
or cooling specific parts of the body,
meaning certain surface areas of your body
as a means to get effects on those particular areas
as well as at the whole body level.
Numerous times throughout this episode,
I've talked about the dangers of overheating.
So what should you do if you think you or someone else
is hyperthermic, is too hot?
Well, if you understand just a little bit
about the cooling and heating systems of your shell and core,
there are some terrific tools that you can use
in order to cool off your core quickly.
And remember the core consists of the nervous system,
the spinal cord and the viscera,
which are really the organs you're trying to protect.
So being able to cool off the core of your body quickly
can be very beneficial and in some cases
it could even save your life.
There is a way to more quickly heat or cool the body
and that's through specific elements of your shell,
meaning particular skin surfaces.
I've talked extensively about this in the episode on cold.
It was also covered in the episode with my guest,
Dr. Craig Heller from the biology department at Stanford.
It relates to the so-called glabrous skin surfaces
on the upper half of our face,
palms of our hands and the bottoms of our feet.
And for those of you that heard this before,
I encourage you to continue to listen nonetheless
because today I'm going to talk about specifically
how to heat the body or cool the body
through these glabrous skin surfaces.
Very briefly, the mechanism is as follows.
The palms of our hands, the bottoms of our feet
and the upper half of our face
overlies specific types of vasculature,
meaning specific types of veins and arteries
that don't have capillaries between them.
And as a consequence, heat and cold can move very quickly
from the palms of the hands, the bottoms of the feet
and the upper half of our face
and change our core body temperature.
There's a name for these particular vascular structures.
They're called AVAs or arteriovenous astomoses.
Basically veins and arteries interacting directly
without capillaries in between,
which allows cooling of blood or heating of blood
much more quickly than is possible
by applying colder heat elsewhere on the body
where capillaries intervene between veins and arteries.
These AVAs, arteriovenous astomoses can be leveraged
to cool off your core body temperature very quickly.
The key thing is to get the palms of your hands,
the bottoms of your feet and the upper half of your face
in contact with a cold surface or fluid
that is cold enough to cool the blood
and the core of your body,
but not so cold that it constricts the veins
just below the palms of your hands,
the bottoms of your feet or the upper half of your face.
So not placing ice packs necessarily,
but maybe placing cool towels on the bottoms of the feet,
the palms of the hands and the upper half of the face
and as they warm up,
replacing those with other cool towels.
The exact temperature will depend
on how hot you happen to be.
I can't know that without knowing your particular
circumstances.
If you'd like to learn more about how to cool off your core
very quickly and some of the details
and some of the technologies that are being developed
to do that,
please see the episode I did with Craig Heller
or the episode on cold.
If you don't want to go to those episodes,
here's a good procedure that you could use.
You could grab, for instance,
a package of frozen broccoli or frozen blueberries.
If someone is really, really warm,
make sure they take off their shoes and socks,
get their feet on top of those,
ideally get some into their hands as well,
get some cool compresses and get them onto people's face.
You could of course also put a cool compress
on the back of the neck, on the top of the head.
That would be an especially good idea
if someone were hyperthermic because of the way
that cooling of the brain occurs
under conditions of hyperthermia.
But the key point here is that just putting cold compresses
or cold materials onto somebody's torso
is not going to be as efficient
as cooling those glabber skin surfaces,
the bottoms of the feet, the palms of the hands
and the upper half of their face.
Similarly, or I suppose to be more accurate,
I should say conversely,
there are times when it is desirable
to heat the core of the body.
And once again, just simply throwing a hot towel
over somebody is not going to be the most efficient way.
If someone is hypothermic, they're too cold,
it is not a problem to cover them with a blanket,
but ideally what you do is you use some warm object
or warm fluid to warm the bottoms of their feet,
their hands and the upper half of their face.
Of course, not so warm that you burn those skin surfaces.
This has actually been examined in studies
from the Heller lab.
Turns out that for instance, to get people out of anesthesia,
it is beneficial to warm their core body temperature.
And of course there is fever,
which you should know is an adaptive response.
While fever is uncomfortable,
and in fact often involves a mismatch
between our perception of our shell
and a perception of our core temperature.
In other words,
there are times when our body temperature is really high,
we have a fever and yet we're shivering, we're cold.
And that's because under conditions of fever,
the immune system liberates certain molecules that impact
and in some ways intentionally disrupt the preoptic area,
the POA and the way it normally functions
so that it can override peripheral signals
and simply try and heat the body
and kill whatever pathogen has infected the body.
So for those of you that think about fever
is always a bad thing, it's not.
Now, of course we don't want our core body temperature
to go so high that tissues of the brain and body are damaged.
This is one reason why if a fever ever goes above 103,
you need to start getting a little bit worried 104.
There are times when you need to call an ambulance
or go to a hospital.
You really need to employ cooling methods
of the sort that I talked about before
to prevent hyperthermia.
Of course, safe ranges for body temperature vary
between infants and adults.
So you can look those up online
depending on the person's age,
what is a safe range, what is not.
But keep in mind that if you are taking compounds,
pills to reduce your fever,
you're actually short-circuiting the protective mechanism
for burning up the pathogen.
And that's because most pathogens, bacteria and viruses
don't survive well at high temperatures.
In fact, in laboratories,
if we want to preserve a virus for use,
we put it into a freezer.
If we want to kill a virus, we heat inoculate it.
So in many ways, fever is your natural form
of heat inoculation designed to kill pathogens
of various kinds.
Now, last but certainly not least,
I want to refer to the study that I described
at the very beginning of this episode
involving what's called local hyperthermia
in order to trigger a number of biological processes
in fat tissue in order to convert white fat to beige fat,
which is the metabolically active form of fat.
Many of you, or at least some of you
should be familiar with the fact
that deliberate cold exposure can increase brown fat stores,
these mitochondrial dense fat stores
that can in turn allow a person to feel more comfortable
in cold temperatures, water or otherwise,
and increase core metabolism.
I talked about this in the episode on cold,
but very briefly, the general protocol again
is to get 11 minutes total per week of uncomfortable
yet safe deliberate cold exposure,
either through ice bath, cold shower,
cold immersion up to the neck,
or some other form of cold exposure.
That triggers increases in brown fat,
that's been beautifully shown by Dr. Susanna Soberg,
and that increase in brown fat
in turn increases core metabolism
and one's ability to feel comfortable in cold temperatures.
This was a study done in humans,
and there's now ample evidence from animal models
to support that this is a general phenomenon
that I think most people could use and benefit from.
Local hyperthermia is a distinctly different phenomenon.
It involves heating a particular surface of the body
as a way to convert the white fat at that location
to beige fat,
which in turn leads to more systemic increases
in thermogenesis and increases in metabolism,
and believe it or not, in fat loss.
Now, the study that I'm referring to
is a very recent study that was published again
in this terrific apex journal, Cell, Cell Press Journal,
and again, one of the three top journals,
Nature Science and Cell are the three top journals,
top because they're the most competitive,
but also generally, not always,
but generally the most stringent
in terms of the review process,
papers that make it into these three journals
generally are a very, very high quality,
and certainly enough people see them
that if they're not of high quality,
they get shot down pretty quickly
in a short amount of time,
whereas papers in other journals
can sometimes last a long time
before they're ever replicated, et cetera.
The title of this paper is Local Hyperthermia Therapy
Induces Browning of White Fat and Treats Obesity.
This was a study that was performed on mice and humans
in the same study.
What the study involved was heating of a local patch of skin
to 41 degrees Celsius,
which is 105.8 degrees Fahrenheit,
but not damaging the skin, okay?
So the methods of heating did not involve
placing something on the skin that would damage it.
In fact, in the study on the mice,
they used this kind of clever molecular chicanery
in order to do it,
and in humans, they used a thermocouple
that would allow them to heat the skin up just locally,
in particular locations on the body
that I'll talk about in a moment.
They refer to this process as LHT, or local heat therapy.
The reason they did this is worth considering.
It's long been known from clinical data,
and in fact, from a bit of research data,
that people that experience burn on a small,
or unfortunately in some circumstances,
a significant portion of their body,
experience overall decreases in body fat
and increases in metabolism that can last many years.
Now, of course, is not reasonable,
nor would one ever want to induce burn
in order to induce fat loss,
but the observed increases in metabolism and fat loss
in response to skin surface burn
couldn't be explained by reductions in activity
related to the burn, for instance.
And in fact, there are molecular pathways
related to something called UCP1,
which is uncoupling protein one.
I talked about this also in the cold episode,
but don't worry if you didn't see that episode,
or if you choose not to.
UCP1 has the ability to increase mitochondrial function
in ways that increase core body temperature overall,
in particular in beige and brown fat,
which are these fat cells that exist
generally along our spine,
and in particular in the upper part of our back,
and around our neck and clavicles,
and they're responsible for acting as a sort of a candle,
or I should say the fuel or the fat of a candle
that can be burned up to manufacture heat in the body.
So if you normally think about fat
and you think about blubbery fat,
you're thinking about white fat,
which again is just a storage site.
Beige fat and brown fat exist at just a few locations,
mainly internally around our spinal cord and our clavicles,
and those fat stores are responsible
for generating heat in our body,
so they are very metabolically active form of fat.
Small children have a lot of brown fat and beige fat,
in particular because very young children can't shiver,
and a number of you probably didn't know that,
but very young children can't shiver,
so they need some way to generate heat
in order to make sure that they stay alive
if they were ever to get cold.
This is also probably the reason why little kids
can run around on a cold day outside without their shirt on
and they don't even seem to notice
whereas adults are freezing cold.
As we get older, the amount of beige and brown fat
tends to either reduce or shrink or disappear entirely,
it's still debated, which happens,
but we know that white fat can be converted
to this more metabolically active form of beige fat
by deliberate cold exposure,
according to the protocol I talked about earlier,
and now it seems, based on this new study,
that local heating of skin tissue can also induce UCP-1
and the effects of UCP-1 on increasing mitochondria,
and in fact, that local hyperthermia,
41 degrees Celsius, that is 105.8 degrees Fahrenheit,
can actually induce the conversion
of white fat to beige fat.
Now that's pretty interesting,
and I can already predict the way this is probably going to
go in the kind of wellness and biohacking
and longevity communities.
I'm sure that pretty soon there are going to be
people putting heating pads on different fat pads
of theirs on their body, trying to reduce
or at least convert the white fat into beige fat,
and who knows, maybe that'll work.
There have not been many controlled studies of this yet.
This is the first, at least to my knowledge,
of such studies looking at this in non-burn conditions.
Nonetheless, the data are mechanistically
even more interesting than this whole business about UCP-1,
and here's why.
Local hyperthermia, using the protocol
that I described before, resulted in the increase
of a promoter, which is essentially a mechanism
by which certain genes regulate their activity.
This is a DNA binding of something called HSF-1.
We don't have to go too deep into the mechanism here
or the nomenclature, but HSF stands for heat shock factor 1
and HSF-1 binding to a particular location in the genome
allowed for a different molecule with a very long name.
I'll just tell it to you for fun,
but you can just let the numbers and letters stream by.
It's not important.
HNRNPA2B1 shortened to A2B1,
which frankly is not that short to begin with.
A2B1 is still a name that should be meaningless
to most everybody, but here's what's really cool.
A2B1 is directly involved in glucose and lipid metabolism
and regulates the genes that control
glucose and lipid metabolism.
So here we have a situation where local heating of skin
converted a metabolically sluggish or inactive cell type,
the white fat cell, into the metabolically charging,
so to speak, beige fat cell, which in turn led to systemic,
meaning body-wide increases in metabolism
through two mechanism.
One mechanism is this increase in UCP-1,
which for those of you that want to know,
UCP-1 causes shifts in the way that potential energy
is pushed from the protons through the mitochondria,
basically more mitochondrial function,
which means more ATP, which means cells are more active,
AKA increased metabolism,
and increases in things like heat shock factor one
and A2B1, which are involved in lipid and glucose metabolism
and regulation.
So I want to be very clear.
This study does not say that spot reduction is possible
with local heating of tissue.
I just can see it now that once this paper gets out
into the press, people are going to say,
oh, heating up a certain patch of skin is going to burn fat
or convert fat to some other cell type at that location.
Sorry, that's not the way it works.
They did observe increases in beige fat cells
at certain locations in the body,
but those increases in beige fat occurred
where beige fat cells always reside,
around the spine, the upper neck, the clavicles, and so on.
This is exciting because it provides
yet another potential mechanism
in addition to deliberate cold exposure
to increase beige fat, meaning the metabolically
active form of fat cell.
It also nicely provides a mechanism,
or at least a potential mechanism for the observation
that burn either small patch of skin being burned,
or again, sadly, large patches of skin being burned,
leading to these very extreme and very long lasting
increases in body fat loss and metabolism.
What, if anything, should you do with this information?
Well, first of all, I want to very much caution people
about putting anything so hot
that it can damage the surface of your skin onto your skin.
That would be a terrible idea.
However, I do predict a time not too far from now
where people will start to explore
the use of local skin heating as a means
to increase the conversion of white to beige fat,
and in turn for beige fat stores
to increase metabolism overall,
and maybe even improve glucose metabolism and thermogenesis.
If you'd like more details about this study,
we will provide a link to it in the show notes caption.
I should mention that the study,
at least the portion of the study that was focused on humans
involved roughly equal numbers of males and females.
The subjects followed their normal daily schedule,
including time and composition of meals, they say,
rest and active hours, et cetera, et cetera.
The local hyperthermia therapy was done in the following way.
Here I'm paraphrasing from their method section.
The subjects were seated in upright posture.
They were wearing a standard test robe
with the head and neck and shoulders unclothed
and one meter away from a thermal imaging camera,
which could basically measure the temperature
at their skin surface to make sure that it remained
constant across subjects and yet safe.
The supraclavicular fat deposits,
meaning the upper shoulders and upper back area
were exposed to this thermal source,
again, 41 degrees for 20 minutes, okay?
So it was 41 degrees for 20 minutes
and their core temperatures and skin temperatures
were monitored before and after
this local hyperthermic therapy.
The subjects were exposed to this local hyperthermia therapy
three days per week, separated by day,
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday.
So they had weekends off for five weeks total
after which their data were collected.
And the study has a number of other
really interesting features that are sure to lead
to increased understanding of both mechanism
and new protocols such as analysis of the genes
and proteins that are activated downstream
of this local hyperthermia therapy.
I find these data incredibly interesting
in part because of the ways that local hyperthermia therapy
mimics deliberate cold exposure therapy,
same downstream mechanisms, UCP1
and some of the other pathways are involved.
And all of that points to a somewhat new
but certainly an important concept.
Many of you have probably heard of hormesis
which is the subjecting of oneself or others I suppose
to enough stress to induce an adaptation of some kind.
So hormesis is the reason why
if you get into cold water repeatedly,
at first it's very painful psychologically
and over time you get used to it.
You never get completely used to it
but you get more used to it.
Hormesis is also used to describe the adaptation
to cardiovascular exercise or to the hard rep sets
of resistance training and the growth of muscles
or the strengthening of muscles
or the improvement in cardiovascular function
to endurance exercise and so forth.
Hormesis is a somewhat common term nowadays.
If you haven't heard it, now you've heard it.
In this paper they describe what is called mitohormesis
which is in essence the fact that any number
of different stressful stimuli provided they activate UCP1
and some of these other pathways that I just described
like HSF1 can induce changes in the mitochondria
that lead to increases in metabolism.
So it shouldn't surprise us that cold and heat
can both lead to increases in metabolism
and conversion of white fat to beige fat.
It shouldn't surprise us because both pathways are stress.
Local hyperthermia is stress, burn certainly is stress,
sauna is a form of stress,
deliberate cold exposure is a form of stress,
exercise is a form of stress
and the adaptation to those stressors is not infinite.
All of those protocols, any protocol for that matter
is going to be effective because it's going to converge
on an existing internal biological mechanism.
So there's no unique mechanism for each protocol.
Each protocol that I've talked about today
whether or not it's five minutes or 20 minutes
or four times in a day or three times per week
or seven times per week is tickling or pushing
or stomping if you will on a given pathway
and really activating it to a milder to severe degree.
What I've tried to do today is to illustrate
the general mechanisms by which heat in particular
can activate certain biological pathways
so that you can devise protocols
that are going to be optimal for you and your needs.
So just to briefly recap,
if you want to get the greatest growth hormone increases,
do sauna or other deliberate heat exposure fairly seldom,
probably no more than once per week, maybe even less
and do it a lot that day,
just make sure that you break it up into multiple sessions.
In the study I described earlier,
they did four sessions, 30 minutes each,
but that was just once a week.
If you're interested in the cardiovascular benefits
and the potential longevity benefits of sauna,
well then it's clear that doing it three to four,
maybe even seven times per week
is going to be more beneficial than doing it
just one or three times per week.
It stands to reason that for those of you interested
in the general health effects of sauna,
about an hour per week broken up into three sessions
makes the most sense based on my read of the data.
And again, that range of 80 to 100 degrees Celsius
is going to be your guide.
And in terms of the mental health benefits,
it seems that getting a little bit uncomfortable
in that heat environment, sauna or otherwise,
provided it's safe is going to be the best way
to access those mental health effects
by way of increasing dynorphin, which as you recall,
will then increase the ability of endorphin
to have its positive effects on mood
after you get out of the sauna
or other deliberate heat exposure.
And in terms of timing,
after a workout of any kind, morning or afternoon,
or if you're not doing it after a workout,
certainly in the later part of the day
is going to be most beneficial as it relates to sleep.
But of course, there's a caveat there,
which I will mention again,
which is that for those of you that have no trouble sleeping
because you're exhausted
or you're just one of these phenomenal sleepers,
well then do it any time of day or night.
But for most people doing it later in the day
is going to be more beneficial
because of the post sauna cooling effect
and the relationship between cooling by a degree or more
as a way to enter sleep.
Thank you for joining me today for my discussion
about the science of heat and heating for health.
If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to us on YouTube.
That's a terrific zero cost way to support us.
In addition, please subscribe to the podcast
on Spotify and or Apple.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity
to leave us up to a five-star review.
If you have comments or feedback or suggestions
about topics or guests that you'd like us to cover
on the Huberman Lab Podcast,
please put those in the comment section on YouTube.
We do read all the comments.
Please also check out the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of today's episode.
That is the best way to support this podcast.
As also mentioned at the beginning of the episode,
we are now partnered with Momentous Supplements.
So if you go to livemomentous.com slash Huberman,
you'll find what we firmly believe
to be the highest quality supplements available
in the specific dosages that match the peer reviewed science
and recommendations made on various episodes
of the Huberman Lab Podcast.
You will also find specific protocols
of how much to take and when, what time of day,
what time of night, et cetera.
And you will also find behavioral tools
that can synergize with those supplements.
Many of you will also be pleased to learn
that Momentous Supplements, of course,
ships within the United States, but also internationally.
If you're not already following us on Instagram or Twitter,
please do so.
It's Huberman Lab on both Instagram and Twitter.
Both places I talk about science and science related tools
in short little snippets that often overlap
with the contents of the podcast,
but often is distinct from the contents of the podcast.
In addition, please consider signing up for our newsletter,
the Neural Network Newsletter.
You can do that by going to HubermanLab.com.
I should point out that we do not share your email
with anybody and we have a very clear privacy policy
that is at that location at HubermanLab.com.
The Neural Network Newsletter includes protocols
and podcast summaries and other things
that we believe people will find useful.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
We'll see you next time.